pure3.md, before:

* PURE: 3
* Title: Creating a responsible disclosure policy for Uptane
* Version: 1
* Last-Modified: 05-September-2022 
* Author: Philip Lapczynski philip.lapczynski@renesas.com, Lois Anne DeLong  lad278@nyu.edu
* Status: 
* Content-Type: text/markdown
* Created: 09-September-2022

# Abstract

This PURE proposes a formal mechanism for reporting vulnerabilities in the Uptane Standard. This includes the establishment of an early disclosure list for which Uptane adopters can voluntarily register to receive notification about detected vulnerabilities and the availability of patches. The PURE also attempts to set some boundaries as to what the Uptane maintainers can reasonably expect to do with any given reported vulnerability since they have only limited capability to oversee the application of such a patch. Therefore, the reporting mechanism proposed here will also specify what those submitting a vulnerability can reasonably expect in the way of a response from Uptane maintainers.

# Motivation

The Uptane community recognizes the possibility of a vulnerability coming to light in its specification and therefore recognizes the need for a mechanism for users to report vulnerabilities. With input from the Uptane community at large, maintainers rigorously endeavor to keep the specification and any reference implementations under its control up-to-date and, in case of a perceived vulnerability, to make patches accessible to other users. What Uptane maintainers are NOT in a position to do is ensure these patches are actually installed.  Most Uptane implementations are private and proprietary. If an issue has the potential to be exploited in the wild, Uptane maintainers or authors cannot actually act on such reported vulnerabilities. Indeed, as an open source framework, the Uptane community does not even have a comprehensive list of all existing implementations. 

Another factor to consider in crafting a responsible disclosure policy for Uptane is that, given the sheer number of individual vehicles that could be impacted if, for example, a recall was deemed necessary, regulatory issues and potential liability would make such a process complicated, and confusing. Automobiles are global products and it is highly likely such procedures would vary in different jurisdictions around the world.

Therefore, the reporting and adoption method suggested below must offer a) an easy way to report observed vulnerabilities in the specification; b) a policy for evaluating and responding to reported vulnerabilities; c) guidelines for releasing vulnerability notifications and patches.

# Specification

## *Establishing an early disclosure mailing list*
Notices will be posted on Uptane's two mailing lists as well as on the Deployment Best Practices web pages inviting adopters and implementers to voluntarily sign up for our early disclosure mailing list.

## *Reporting a vulnerability*
Suspected security vulnerabilities should be reported to `uptane-security [AT] googlegroups [DOT] com. We're committed to working with security researchers to resolve the vulnerabilities they discover. You can help us by following these guidelines:

Please give as much detail as possible for a suspected vulnerability in Uptane including:

* Version in which it was found
* Description of vulnerability
* Examples (if applicable)
* Contact information in case follow-up is needed.

Give us a reasonable time to correct the issue before you disclose the vulnerability. We care deeply about security, but we're an open-source project and our team consists mostly of volunteers.

We will acknowledge the contributions of security researchers (if desired).

## *Response on reported items* 
Uptane will acknowledge receipt of the reported vulnerability in a timely fashion. The maintainers will share this with a small cross-section of active community members. This small group will assess the security risk, determine what may be needed to address the problem, and create the patch.


# Security Analysis

# Backwards Compatibility 

# Copyright 
This document has been placed in the public domain.

Commit message:

additions to PURE3
I fleshed out some proposed procedures. We need reviews to see if what I wrote is feasible. 

I am not sure what would constitute the "Security Analysis" piece for this PURE. Would we need to detail how we would determine the extent of the security risk?

I am assuming that the "backwards compatibility" element would be tied to what the patches might change and not anything to do with the procedure. If so, then backwards compatibility would vary with the vulnerability and its remediation.

pure3.md, after:

* PURE: 3
* Title: Creating a responsible disclosure policy for Uptane
* Version: 1
* Last-Modified: 05-September-2022 
* Author: Philip Lapczynski philip.lapczynski@renesas.com, Lois Anne DeLong  lad278@nyu.edu
* Status: 
* Content-Type: text/markdown
* Created: 09-September-2022

# Abstract

This PURE proposes a formal mechanism for reporting vulnerabilities in the Uptane Standard. This includes the establishment of an early disclosure list for which Uptane adopters can voluntarily register to receive notification about detected vulnerabilities and the availability of patches. The PURE also attempts to set some boundaries as to what the Uptane maintainers can reasonably expect to do with any given reported vulnerability since they have only limited capability to oversee the application of such a patch. Therefore, the reporting mechanism proposed here will also specify what those submitting a vulnerability can reasonably expect in the way of a response from Uptane maintainers.

# Motivation

The Uptane community recognizes the possibility of a vulnerability coming to light in its specification and therefore recognizes the need for a mechanism for users to report vulnerabilities. With input from the Uptane community at large, maintainers rigorously endeavor to keep the specification and any reference implementations under its control up-to-date and, in case of a perceived vulnerability, to make patches accessible to other users. What Uptane maintainers are NOT in a position to do is ensure these patches are actually installed.  Most Uptane implementations are private and proprietary. If an issue has the potential to be exploited in the wild, Uptane maintainers or authors cannot actually act on such reported vulnerabilities. Indeed, as an open source framework, the Uptane community does not even have a comprehensive list of all existing implementations. 

Another factor to consider in crafting a responsible disclosure policy for Uptane is that, given the sheer number of individual vehicles that could be impacted if, for example, a recall was deemed necessary, regulatory issues and potential liability would make such a process complicated, and confusing. Automobiles are global products and it is highly likely such procedures would vary in different jurisdictions around the world.

Therefore, the reporting and adoption method suggested below must offer a) an easy way to report observed vulnerabilities in the specification; b) a policy for evaluating and responding to reported vulnerabilities; c) guidelines for releasing vulnerability notifications and patches.

# Specification

## *Establishing an early disclosure mailing list*
Notices will be posted on Uptane's two mailing lists as well as on the Deployment Best Practices web pages inviting adopters and implementers to voluntarily sign up for our early disclosure mailing list. The individuals/organizations who sign up for this list will be notified of verified vulnerabilities prior to any public announcement and will be sent patches once they are completed.

The early disclosure mailing list will be used only for the purposes stated above.

## *Reporting a vulnerability*
Suspected security vulnerabilities should be reported to `uptane-security [AT] googlegroups [DOT] com. We're committed to working with security researchers to resolve the vulnerabilities they discover. You can help us by following these guidelines:

Please give as much detail as possible for a suspected vulnerability in Uptane including:

* Version in which it was found
* Description of vulnerability
* Examples (if applicable)
* Contact information in case follow-up is needed.

Give us a reasonable time to correct the issue before you disclose the vulnerability. We care deeply about security, but we're an open-source project and our team consists mostly of volunteers.

We will acknowledge the contributions of security researchers (if desired).

## *Response to reported items* 
Uptane will acknowledge receipt of the reported vulnerability in a timely fashion. The maintainers will share this with a small cross-section of active community members. This small group will assess the security risk, determine what may be needed to address the problem, and create the patch.

Upon completion of the patch it will be automatically delivered to those on the early disclosure mailing list.

Once it is determined that the reported vulnerability does pose a serious security issue, Uptane maintainers will issue an appropriate public statement and will make patches accessible through a secure source. 

# Security Analysis

# Backwards Compatibility 


# Copyright 
This document has been placed in the public domain.
